America at its best is also courageous. Our national courage has been clear in times of depression and war  when defeating common dangers defined our common good. Now we must choose if the example of our fathers and mothers will inspire us or condemn us. We must show courage in a time of blessing by confronting problems instead of passing them on to future generations.


Together we will reclaim America s schools before ignorance and apathy claim more young lives. We will reform Social Security and Medicare  sparing our children from struggles we have the power to prevent. And we will reduce taxes to recover the momentum of our economy and reward the effort and enterprise of working Americans.


We will build our defenses beyond challenge  lest weakness invite challenge. We will confront weapons of mass destruction  so that a new century is spared new horrors. The enemies of liberty and our country should make no mistake  America remains engaged in the world  by history and by choice  shaping a balance of power that favors freedom.


We will defend our allies and our interests. We will show purpose without arrogance. We will meet aggression and bad faith with resolve and strength. And to all nations  we will speak for the values that gave our Nation birth.


America at its best is compassionate. In the quiet of American conscience  we know that deep  persistent poverty is unworthy of our Nation s promise. And whatever our views of its cause  we can agree that children at risk are not at fault.


Abandonment and abuse are not acts of God  they are failures of love. And the proliferation of prisons  however necessary  is no substitute for hope and order in our souls. Where there is suffering  there is duty. Americans in need are not strangers  they are citizens—not problems but priorities. And all of us are diminished when any are hopeless.


Government has great responsibilities for public safety and public health  for civil rights and common schools. Yet  compassion is the work of a nation  not just a government. And some needs and hurts are so deep they will only respond to a mentor s touch or a pastor s prayer. Church and charity  synagogue and mosque lend our communities their humanity  and they will have an honored place in our plans and in our laws.


Many in our country do not know the pain of poverty. But we can listen to those who do. And I can pledge our Nation to a goal  When we see that wounded traveler on the road to Jericho  we will not pass to the other side.


America at its best is a place where personal responsibility is valued and expected. Encouraging responsibility is not a search for scapegoats  it is a call to conscience. And though it requires sacrifice  it brings a deeper fulfillment. We find the fullness of life not only in options but in commitments. And we find that children and community are the commitments that set us free.


Our public interest depends on private character  on civic duty and family bonds and basic fairness  on uncounted  unhonored acts of decency  which give direction to our freedom.


Sometimes in life we re called to do great things. But as a saint of our times has said   Every day we are called to do small things with great love.  The most important tasks of a democracy are done by everyone.


I will live and lead by these principles  to advance my convictions with civility  to serve the public interest with courage  to speak for greater justice and compassion  to call for responsibility and try to live it  as well. In all these ways  I will bring the values of our history to the care of our times.


What you do is as important as anything Government does. I ask you to seek a common good beyond your comfort  to defend needed reforms against easy attacks  to serve your Nation  beginning with your neighbor. I ask you to be citizens  Citizens  not spectators  citizens  not subjects  responsible citizens building communities of service and a nation of character.


Americans are generous and strong and decent  not because we believe in ourselves but because we hold beliefs beyond ourselves. When this spirit of citizenship is missing  no Government program can replace it. When this spirit is present  no wrong can stand against it.


After the Declaration of Independence was signed  Virginia statesman John Page wrote to Thomas Jefferson   We know the race is not to the swift  nor the battle to the strong. Do you not think an angel rides in the whirlwind and directs this storm? 


Much time has passed since Jefferson arrived for his inauguration. The years and changes accumulate  but the themes of this day  he would know  our Nation s grand story of courage and its simple dream of dignity.


We are not this story s author  who fills time and eternity with his purpose. Yet  his purpose is achieved in our duty. And our duty is fulfilled in service to one another. Never tiring  never yielding  never finishing  we renew that purpose today  to make our country more just and generous  to affirm the dignity of our lives and every life. This work continues  the story goes on  and an angel still rides in the whirlwind and directs this storm.
